Updates and elaboration on packaging and distribution. (#80)
MolSSI-Education/python-package-best-practices: _episodes/10-distribution.md

---
title: "Distributing Packages"
teaching: 30
exercises: 60
questions:
- "How can you get your project out there?"
objectives:
- "Discuss community strategies"
keypoints:
- ""
---

# Preliminary

Register a test account on test.pypi.org.

Create an access token, and *don't lose it!*
(I keep a copy of the text for my token in my password manager.)

Create `$HOME/.pypirc`. It should look something like the following.

~~~
[testpypi]
  username = __token__

>   password = pypi-Abunchofbase64encodedbinarydataAbunchofbase64encodedbinarydataAbunchofbase64encodedbinarydataAbunchofbase64encodedbinarydata

Author: See https://github.com/MolSSI-Education/python-package-best-practices/pull/80#discussion_r959411486

to `setuptools` and the `distutils` package it is built on.
Many tools for helping to build and test packages came to
rely on `setup.py`, which made them incompatible with non-setuptools build
systems.
> 
> In an ongoing effort at generalization, the Python community is now
encouraging package authors to use a `pyproject.toml` file to direct the build
system. `distutils` is scheduled for retirement with Python 3.12.
In preparation, `setuptools` no longer requires `distutils` or `setup.py`,
and can be configured entirely with `setup.cfg` and `pyproject.toml`.
{: .callout}

## Building and uploading to PyPI

Refer to https://packaging.python.org/en/latest/tutorials/packaging-projects/
for build-system-agnostic tutorial on
* packaging Python projects for distribution
* publishing packages to pypi.org for automatic download with `pip install`

For more in depth documentation on packaging for PyPI specifically with setuptools,
see https://packaging.python.org/en/latest/guides/distributing-packages-using-setuptools/

Essentially, though, once you have an account on `pypi.org` and you have built
a distribution archive with `python -m build`, you can `pip install twine` and

> use twine to upload your package, per the above linked tutorial.

Author: See https://github.com/MolSSI-Education/python-package-best-practices/pull/80#discussion_r959417100

Caution: *strongly* consider creating an account on `test.pypi.org` and uploading
an initial "alpha" or "beta" release of your package to see how it looks and to
do test installations.

Note that pypi.org enforces universal uniqueness of packages and versions.
Once you have uploaded `molecool` version `1.0.0`, you cannot replace it;
you can only upload additional versions. (You can "yank" a release, but this
only marks the package as "yanked", indicating it should not be used.
It is still out there.)
* Be tidy with your official releases.
* Be conservative with alpha and beta pre-releases.
* Test the publication of new releases on test.pypi.org before pypi.org to avoid
  cluttering your versioning scheme and your release history on pypi.

# Distributing packages for `conda install`

> *beyond the scope of the present material?*

Reviewer: I want to have a discussion on this, so I don't think this is beyond the scope.

---
title: "Distributing Packages"
teaching: 30
exercises: 60
questions:
- "How can you get your project out there?"
objectives:
- "Discuss community strategies"
keypoints:
- ""
---

# Preliminary

Register a test account on test.pypi.org.

> Create an access token, and *don't lose it!*
> (I keep a copy of the text for my token in my password manager.)
> 
> Create `$HOME/.pypirc`. It should look something like the following.
> 
> ~~~
> [testpypi]
>   username = __token__
>   password = pypi-Abunchofbase64encodedbinarydataAbunchofbase64encodedbinarydataAbunchofbase64encodedbinarydataAbunchofbase64encodedbinarydata

Author: ```suggestion
Create an access token, and *don't lose it!*
(I keep a copy of the text for my token in my password manager.)

The access token will be a string that begins with `pypi-` followed by a sequence of base64 encoded bytes
that we will refer to as "YOURTOKEN" below.

Create `$HOME/.pypirc`. It should look something like the following, substituting your access token in the password field.

~~~
[testpypi]
  username = __token__
  password = YOURTOKEN
```

~~~
{: .output}

You will also eventually need to get an account on the main pypi.org,
but you can do that later.

Install some additional packages to help build and upload your distribution.
~~~
pip install build twine
~~~
{: .language-bash}

# Preparing a release

## Release notes

Make sure your README file and documentation are up to date.
Check the project description in your project's metadata, too.

Consider whether there is some announcement text that you would
want to include in a text file or in a blurb in your GitHub Releases tab.

> *TODO: Do we care about GitHub's Release and Tags tabs?*

Author: The conclusion at the last meeting was that we should briefly address the existence of these features. I will add a paragraph or two. Do we think an informational call-out would be sufficient? What does that look like? `{: .callout}`?

Reviewer: Yes, I think `{: .callout}` would be appropriate.

> want to include in a text file or in a blurb in your GitHub Releases tab.
> 
> *TODO: Do we care about GitHub's Release and Tags tabs?*

Author: ```suggestion
want to include in a text file or in a blurb in your GitHub
[Releases tab](https://docs.github.com/en/repositories/releasing-projects-on-github/about-releases).
This can be a good place to publish [release notes](https://docs.github.com/en/repositories/releasing-projects-on-github/automatically-generated-release-notes).
```

## Tagging the release

~~~
git status
~~~
{: .language-bash}

Make sure that your changes are checked in and that you don't have
extra files sitting around.

Tag the latest commit with a version identifier.
Let's get ready to publish `molecool` 1.0.0a1, the first alpha release of our package.
~~~
git tag 1.0.0a1
~~~
{: .language-bash}

Build the distribution archive(s) for the packaging system you are using (see below): `PyPI` or `Conda`.

> 

Author: ```suggestion

~~~
Tags created in your local repository are not automatically shared when you `git push` a branch.
You can push tags the same way you push branches, or you can create the tag directly on GitHub.
With the GitHub interface, you can associate tags with
[Releases](https://docs.github.com/en/repositories/releasing-projects-on-github/about-releases)
to provide a place to publish release notes and automatically generate links to archive files of
your repository at the tagged commits.

Tags created through the GitHub interface (or pushed from a different location) will be available
locally the next time you `git fetch`.

Keep in mind that the GitHub repository page is one of the main entry points for new users of your package.
Your project looks healthier and better maintained with a nice, well documented history of
[releases](https://docs.github.com/en/repositories/releasing-projects-on-github/viewing-your-repositorys-releases-and-tags).
~~~
{: .callout}
```

Tags and GitHub releases do not automatically make your package easier to find or install,
but they can be helpful in preparing the source of version information or the source archive
as you prepare the *distribution* of your package.

Note that the untagged post-release version strings
(using our formatting rules in `pyproject.toml`)
do not satisfy PEP 440 and will be rejected if we try to upload to pypi.
This is probably a good thing; it will help keep us from accidentally publishing
releases before they are ready, or messing up our versioning scheme by forgetting
a semantic versioning tag.

> ## Goodbye to setup.py?
>
> Historically packages built with `setuptools` used a `setup.py` script
as the entry point to the `setuptools` build system. `setup.py` is specific
to `setuptools` and the `distutils` package it is built on.
Many tools for helping to build and test packages came to
rely on `setup.py`, which made them incompatible with non-setuptools build
systems.
> 
> In an ongoing effort at generalization, the Python community is now
encouraging package authors to use a `pyproject.toml` file to direct the build
system. `distutils` is scheduled for retirement with Python 3.12.
In preparation, `setuptools` no longer requires `distutils` or `setup.py`,
and can be configured entirely with `pyproject.toml`.
{: .callout}

### Building and uploading to PyPI

> Refer to https://packaging.python.org/en/latest/tutorials/packaging-projects/
> for build-system-agnostic tutorial on
> * packaging Python projects for distribution
> * publishing packages to pypi.org for automatic download with `pip install`
> 
> You will note that most of the configuration described in the packaging tutorial
> has already been pre-configured by the cookiecutter.
> 
> Essentially, once you have an account on `pypi.org` and you have built
> a distribution archive with `python -m build`, you can `pip install twine` and
> use twine to upload your package, per the above linked tutorial.

Author: ```suggestion
Read through https://packaging.python.org/en/latest/tutorials/packaging-projects/
for a build-system-agnostic tutorial on
* packaging Python projects for distribution
* publishing packages to pypi.org for automatic download with `pip install`

By the end of the [tutorial](https://packaging.python.org/en/latest/tutorials/packaging-projects/),
you will understand how to get an account on `pypi.org`,
build a distribution archive with `python -m build`,
and use twine to upload your package.

The [tutorial](https://packaging.python.org/en/latest/tutorials/packaging-projects/) should go quickly because,
as you will note, most of the configuration it describes
has already been pre-configured by the cookiecutter.
```
